\input texinfo.tex
@setfilename nyacc-hg.info
@settitle NYACC Hacker's Guide

@copying
Copyright (C) 2017 -- Matthew R. Wette.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included with the distribution as COPYING.DOC.
@end copying

@clear skip

@titlepage
@title C99 Parser User's Guide
@subtitle rough and incomplete

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@quotation
Copyright @copyright{} 2017 -- Matthew R. Wette.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included with the distribution as COPYING.DOC.
@end quotation
@author Matt Wette
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Introduction
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction ::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter The Introduction

This is a manual for ...

To get CPP pre-defined macros w/ gcc:
@example
$ touch /tmp/z.c
$ gcc -dM -E /tmp/z.c > /tmp/z.e
@end example

Note on CPP replacement text: IIRC, C99 will remove comments from CPP
statements before processing.  I preserve this and remove inside the
CPP parser.

@section Thoughts

@verbatim
;; Alternatives:
;; * include: in-place as-tree ignore
;; * defdict: keep ignore
;; * parsdef: yes no
;; * error: eval parse ignore
;; * execflo: yes no
;; * pragma:
;; * expand-id: yes no
;; * mode: file (parse cpp lines) ; code (eval cpp lines)
;; * eval-but-nodef: fail 
;; 
;; Options:
;; * Option 1 (intended file mode):
;;   + include: parse-tree (but switch exec-cflow?
;;   + defines: ignore
;;   + error: 
;; * code mode:
;;
;; Controls:    
;;   + tddict: enable includes to be skipped, w/ added typedefs
;;     alt: use ftn to return typenames and defs
;;          name => (cons list-of-typenames  (list of "ABC=123"))
;;          defined but not well-defined (i.e., limits.h )
;;   + xdef?: enable how idents are expanded
;;
;; need 64bit typical, 32bit typical
;; execflo implies need parsdef

;; stuff to watch out for:
;; 1) typename aliases
;;    in incl file: #define SFLOAT static float
;;    in code file: SFLOAT x;
;;    => in file mode, check #defines for typenames
@end verbatim

@section The Free Documentation License
The Free Documentation License is included in the Guile Reference
Manual.  It is included with the @sc{nyacc} source as COPYING.DOC.

@bye
@c --- last line
