\input texinfo.tex
@setfilename nyacc-c99-ug.info
@settitle C99 User's Guide

@clear no-skip

@copying
Copyright (C) 2017,2019 -- Matthew R. Wette.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included with the distribution as COPYING.DOC.
@end copying

@headings off
@everyfooting @| @thispage @|

@format
C99 Parser User Guide
Matt Wette
June 2019
With NYACC Version 1.06.7
@end format

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top NYACC C99 User Guide
This is a user guide for the NYACC C99 parser.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction ::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@heading Introduction

This is a manual for the C99 parser provided with NYACC.  It is a
LALR(1) based parser written in Scheme as implemented in Guile.  The
grammar can be examined by looking at the source code in the file
@file{nyacc/lang/c99/mach.scm}.  The parser has been used to generate
object code (see @url{https://www.gnu.org/software/mes/}) but it has
options to make it useful for processing C code in other ways.  For
example, the FFI Helper included with NYACC uses the parser to
generate FFI (foreign function interface) code for many C libraries.
It does this by parsing the associated C header files.  

@deffn {Procedure} parse-c99 [options]
where options are
@table @code
@item #:cpp-defs @i{defs-list}
@i{defs-list} is a list of strings where each string is of the form
@i{NAME} or @i{NAME=VALUE}.
@item #:inc-dirs @i{dir-list}
@i{dir-list} is a list of strings of paths to look for directories.
@item #:inc-help @i{helpers}
@i{helpers} is an a-list where keys are include files (e.g.,
@code{"stdint.h"}) and the value is a list of type aliases or CPP define
(e.g., @code{"foo_t" "FOO_MAX=3"}).  The default helper is @code{c99-def-help} 
(see below).
@item #:mode @i{mode}
@i{mode} is one literal @code{'code}, @code{'file}, or @code{'decl}.
The default mode is @code{'code}.
@item #:debug @i{bool}
If @i{bool} evaluates to true, print productions as they are reduced.
@end table
This will parse the content taken from the current input port until
end if input is reached.   A parse tree in the form of an SXML
expression is returned.  See below for the syntax.
This needs to be explained in some detail.
tdd = typedef dict: (("<time>" time_t) ... ("<unistd.h>" ...))
Default mode is @code{'code}.
@example
(with-input-from-file "abc.c"
  (parse-c #:cpp-defs '("ABC=123"))
           #:inc-dirs '(("." "./incs" "/usr/include"))
           #:inc-help (append '("myinc.h" "foo_t" "bar_t") c99-std-help)
           #:mode 'file))
@end example
Note: for @code{file} mode user still needs to make sure CPP conditional
expressions can be fully evaluated, which may mean adding compiler generated
defines (e.g., using @code{gen-cpp-defs}).
@end deffn

@subheading Include Helpers

The C99 parsers can use ``include helpers''.  This allows files to be
parsed without reading full include files.  The user provides
typenames (types defined using @code{typedef}) and defines.  The
syntax for the include-helper optional argument to the parsers is
@example
(define my-inc-helper
 '(("foo.h" "foo_t" "ABC=123" "SUM(X,Y)=((X)+(Y))")
   ("bar.h" "bar_t" "DEF=456" "MAX(X,Y)=((X)>(Y)?(X):(Y))"))
@end example

The special helper @code{"__builtin"} will be ``included'' automatically
at the start of parsing.  This allows one to generate definitions for
compiler builtins like @code{__builtin_va_list}.
@example
(define inc-helper
 '(("__builtin" "__builtin_va_list=void*")))
@end example
@noindent
If no inc-helper is provided, the default is @code{c99-def-help},
which is defined (in the module @code{(nyacc lang c99 util)}) as
@example
(define c99-def-help
  '(("__builtin"
     "__builtin_va_list=void*"
     "__inline__=inline" "__inline=__inline__"
     "__restrict__=restrict" "__restrict=__restrict__"
     "__signed__=signed" "__signed=__signed__"
     "asm(X)=__asm__(X)" "__asm(X)=__asm__(X)"
     "__attribute(X)=__attribute__(X)"
     "__volatile__=volatile" "__volatile=__volatile__"
     "__extension__=" "__extension=__extension__"
     "asm=__asm__" "__asm=__asm__"
     "__attribute(X)=__attribute__(X)")))
@end example
@noindent
The module @code{(nyacc lang c99 util)} also defines
@code{c99-std-help}, which includes the above and typedefs and CPP
defines for many standard includes (e.g., @file{alloca.h},
@file{limits.h}).  See the source @file{nyacc/lang/c99/util.scm} for
more detail.

@subheading Misc Items

The special symbol @code{C99_ANY} can be used for symbols which you
don't want to define.  In the parser will handle this as XXX

@heading Stuff

Note on CPP replacement text: IIRC, C99 will remove comments from CPP
statements before processing.  I preserve this and remove inside the
CPP parser.

@heading The Unit Parser

TALK ABOUT @code{fixed-width-int-names}

@deffn Procedure parse-c99 [#:cpp-defs def-a-list] [#:inc-dirs dir-list] [#:mode ('code|'file)] [#:debug bool]
This needs to be explained in some detail.
Default mode is @code{'code}.
@example
(with-input-from-file "abc.c"
  (parse-c #:cpp-defs '("ABC=123"))
           #:inc-dirs (append '("./incs") c99-std-dict)
           #:inc-help '(("myinc.h" "foo_t" "bar_t"))
           #:mode 'file))
@end example
@end deffn

@subheading Modes
There are several modes for parsing which affect the way the C
preprocessor statements are handled, and how the parse tree is
generated.  The following list explains the intent behind these
parsing modes.  Later we mention some fine points.
@itemize
@item @emph{code} mode (the default)
In this mode, the proprocess works like a normal C compiler.  The
preprocessor statements are evaluated as they are read and macros in
the code are expanded as they are read.
@item @emph{decl} mode
This mode is intended to be used for tools which want to
extract the declarations and definitions which are explicit in a file,
but allow access to declarations and definitions in included files.
@item @emph{file} mode
is intended to be used for tools which want to
transform C files somehow.  For example, one could parse a file and
remove all comments.  This will keep the CPP structure at the top
level.  Preprocessor statements at the top level are not evaluted.
@*
Note:
There is a change in versions starting with 0.77.0.
In these all defines required for evaluating CPP expressions in
if-then have to be resolved.
@end itemize

Options are as follows
@table @code
@item #:cpp-defs
This is a list of define strings (e.g., @code{'("ABC=123")}.
@item #:inc-dirs
This is an ordered list of directories to search for include files.
@item #:inc-help
This is an a-list of include helpers, where keys are the include file
or path (e.g., @code{sys/types.h}).
@item #:mode
This is the mode: @code{'code}, @code{'decl} or @code{'file}.  The default is
@code{'code}.
@item #:xdef?
This is a predicate function to determine whether to expand a
definition (used in file mode).  See below.
@end table

Note: The user needs to define 
@code{"__has_include(X)=__has_include__(X)"} to enable has-include;
@code{"__has_include=__has_include__"} will not work.  (Should I
worry that it does not?)

@deffn xdef? name mode => #t|#f
Given string @var{name} and @var{mode} indicate whether the parser
should expand using CPP defines.  The default is
@code{(lambda(name mode) (eqv? mode 'code))}.
@end deffn

@heading Expression Parser

To be documented.


@heading Copying

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included with the distribution as COPYING.DOC.

The Free Documentation License is included in the Guile Reference
Manual.  It is included with the @sc{nyacc} source as COPYING.DOC.

@bye
@c --- last line
